Added initial guide on the TCP =>gRPC client migration (#486)
EventStore/documentation: docs/clients/dotnet/21.2/migration-to-gRPC.md

        var events = new List<object>();

        do
        {
            var page = await _connection.ReadStreamEventsForwardAsync(
                stream, start, pageSize, true
            );

            if (page.Status == SliceReadStatus.StreamNotFound)
                throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(
                    nameof(stream), $"Stream '{stream}' was not found"
                );

            events.AddRange(
                page.Events.Select(Deserialize)
            );
            if (page.IsEndOfStream) break;

            start += pageSize;
        } while (true);

        return events;

        static object Deserialize(this ResolvedEvent resolvedEvent)
        {
            var dataType = TypeMapper.GetType(resolvedEvent.Event.EventType);
            var jsonData = Encoding.UTF8.GetString(resolvedEvent.Event.Data);
            var data = JsonConvert.DeserializeObject(jsonData, dataType);
            return data;
        }
    }

    public async Task<bool> StreamExists(string stream)
    {
        var result = await _connection.ReadEventAsync(stream, 1, false);
        return result.Status != EventReadStatus.NoStream;
    }
}
```

> ## Differences in Connection Management

Reviewer: We don't use capital casing for titles, I keep fixing it everywhere....

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/ffc35a21c4c86f91e92896e4d467dece8d636351.

            expectedStreamRevision,
            uncommittedEvents.ToArray(),
            cancellationToken: cancellationToken
        );

    public void Append(params EventData[] eventData) =>
        uncommittedEvents.AddRange(eventData);
}
```

## Reading Events

### Read direction

TCP Client have dedicated methods for reading events in the specific direction: 
- `ReadStreamEventsForwardAsync`,
- `ReadStreamEventsBackwardAsync`,
- `ReadAllEventsForwardAsync`,
- `ReadStreamEventsBackwardAsync`.

 In the gRPC client, we unified those methods into methods with the direction parameter:
- `ReadStreamAsync`,
- `ReadAllAsync`.

To read stream forwards, use:

```csharp
await using var readResult = client.ReadStreamAsync(
    Direction.Forwards,
    streamName,
    StreamPosition.Start
);
```

To read stream backwards, use: 

```csharp
await using var readResult = client.ReadStreamAsync(
    Direction.Backwards,
    streamName,
    StreamPosition.End
);
```

Accordingly, to read the `$all` stream forwards, use:

```csharp
await using var readResult = client.ReadAllAsync(
    Direction.Forwards,
    streamName,
    Position.Start
);
```

and to  the `$all` stream backwards:

```csharp

> await using var readResult = client.ReadAllAsync(

Reviewer: Don't we want to add the max count to all of those? It will timeout if you read without max count.

Author: I'd keep it like that, as I hope that the new release will be made next week, and this case will be handled correctly.

Instead of doing paging like that in TCP client:

```csharp
public async Task<IEnumerable<object>> LoadEvents(string stream)
{
    const int pageSize = 4096;

    var start  = 0;
    var events = new List<object>();

    do
    {
        var page = await _connection.ReadStreamEventsForwardAsync(
            stream, start, pageSize, true
        );

        if (page.Status == SliceReadStatus.StreamNotFound)
            throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(
                nameof(stream), $"Stream '{stream}' was not found"
            );

        events.AddRange(
            page.Events.Select(Deserialize)
        );
        if (page.IsEndOfStream) break;

        start += pageSize;

>     } while (true);

Reviewer: Can do `while (!page.IsEndOfStream`) and avoid if/break

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/ffc35a21c4c86f91e92896e4d467dece8d636351.

    return events;
}
```

You can simplify that in the gRPC client into:

```csharp
public async Task<IEnumerable<object>> LoadEvents(string stream)
{
    await using var readResult = _client.ReadStreamAsync(
        Direction.Forwards,
        stream,
        StreamPosition.Start
    );

>     if(await readResult.ReadState != ReadState.Ok)

Reviewer: missing space

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/ffc35a21c4c86f91e92896e4d467dece8d636351.

        throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(
            nameof(stream), $"Stream '{stream}' was not found"
        );

    return await readResult
        .Select(Deserialize)
        .ToListAsync();
}
```

### Serialisation

> The gRPC client uses `ReadOnlyMemory<byte>` instead of `byte` array to make the events processing more efficient. To support that, you need to modify your deserialisation logic slightly:

Reviewer: instead of byte array or `byte[]`

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/ffc35a21c4c86f91e92896e4d467dece8d636351.

```csharp{4-5}
  object Deserialize(this ResolvedEvent resolvedEvent)
  {
      var dataType = TypeMapper.GetType(resolvedEvent.Event.EventType);
-     var jsonData = Encoding.UTF8.GetString(resolvedEvent.Event.Data);
+     var jsonData = Encoding.UTF8.GetString(resolvedEvent.Event.Data.Span);

>       var data = JsonConvert.DeserializeObject(jsonData, dataType);

Reviewer: Do we need to use Newtonsoft.Json in these examples? .NET serializer can directly serialize to bytes.

Author: Added a disclaimer in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/3e9d2d2757645583da3718b5b3ec8eef2c983165.

      return data;
  }
```

## Built-in retries

The gRPC client handles reconnections internally. But contrary to the TCP one, it does not have built-in retries for failed operations. It only does retries for the persistent subscriptions. If your codebase depends on them, you should wrap operations with your custom retry policy (e.g. using [Polly](https://github.com/App-vNext/Polly) library).

If you were using the following configuration:

```csharp
var settings = ConnectionSettings.Create()
    .FailOnNoServerResponse()
    .KeepReconnecting()
    .SetOperationTimeoutTo(TimeSpan.FromSeconds(5))
    .LimitRetriesForOperationTo(7);

var connection = 

>     EventStoreConnection.Create(

Reviewer: Can be one line

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/ffc35a21c4c86f91e92896e4d467dece8d636351.

        connectionString,
	settings 
);
```

You can replace it with a retry policy using Polly:

```csharp
public static class RetryScope
{
    private static readonly AsyncPolicyWrap RetryPolicy
        = Policy

>             .Handle<Exception>()

Reviewer: Not sure it's a good idea to retry everything. Like `StreamDeleted` is better not to retry.

Author: Added warning for retry policy definition in: https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/ffc35a21c4c86f91e92896e4d467dece8d636351.

Author: I also replaced the example of retry to reads instead of appends in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/1225180ca1aafe17ff5cda49c18adb89d77d1e85.

# Migration to gRPC client

The TCP client is considered legacy. We recommend migrating to the gRPC client. 

We decided to use gRPC as our communication protocol, as it enabled us to standardise client communication. Thanks to that, we benefit from the built-in gRPC functionalities like streaming, back-pressure,etc., instead of building custom implementations. 

> As gRPC is a multi-platform and widely adopted standard, it enabled us to provide a unified approach and deliver clients for other dev environments like Go, JVM, NodeJs, and Rust.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As gRPC is multi-platform and a widely adopted standard, it has enabled us to provide a unified approach and deliver clients for other dev environments like Go, JVM, NodeJs, and Rust.
```

> The TCP client will still be getting necessary bug fixes, but new database features will be only delivered for the gRPC client (e.g., persistent subscription to `$all`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP client will still get necessary bug fixes, but new database features will be only delivered for gRPC clients (e.g., persistent subscription to `$all`).
```

Having all of that, we encourage you to migrate to the gRPC client. This document outlines the needed steps. Check also the [gRPC documentation](/clients/grpc/) for more details on how to use it.

## Update the target Framework

gRPC client doesn't support .NET Standard. The change comes from using different gRPC implementations for the specific .NET Framework version to tune the performance.

If you were using it in the .NET Standard library, you have to update it to one of:
- .NET 6 (`net6.0`),
- .NET 5 (`net5.0`),
- .NET Core 3.1 (`netcoreapp3.1`),

> - .NET Framework 4.8 (`net48`)

Reviewer 3: well .net 48.....

Author: Fair point 😉 Removed in https://github.com/EventStore/documentation/pull/486/commits/bfc112498e63d9366d62fc5a7519150f5c0a9a21.

We recommend using the latest .NET framework version, so .NET 6.

```xml{3-4}
 <Project Sdk="Microsoft.NET.Sdk">
   <PropertyGroup>
-    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
+    <TargetFramework>net6.0</TargetFramework>
   </PropertyGroup>
 </Project>
```

## Update package references

> To use the gRPC client, you need to replace the TPC client package (`EventStore.Client`) with the gRPC one (`EventStore.Client.Grpc.Streams`). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the gRPC client, you need to replace the TCP client package (`EventStore.Client`) with the gRPC one (`EventStore.Client.Grpc.Streams`). 
```

```xml{2-3}
 <ItemGroup>
-  <PackageReference Include="EventStore.Client" Version="21.2.1" />
+  <PackageReference Include="EventStore.Client.Grpc.Streams" Version="21.2.0" />
 </ItemGroup>
```

## Migration strategies

> You may also consider step by step migration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may also consider a step by step migration:
```

        do
        {
            var page = await tcpConnection.ReadStreamEventsForwardAsync(
                stream, start, pageSize, true
            );

            if (page.Status == SliceReadStatus.StreamNotFound)
                throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(
                    nameof(stream), $"Stream '{stream}' was not found"
                );

            events.AddRange(
                page.Events.Select(Deserialize)
            );
            if (page.IsEndOfStream) break;

            start += pageSize;
        } while (true);

        return events;

        static object Deserialize(this ResolvedEvent resolvedEvent)
        {
            var dataType = TypeMapper.GetType(resolvedEvent.Event.EventType);
            var jsonData = Encoding.UTF8.GetString(resolvedEvent.Event.Data);
            var data = JsonConvert.DeserializeObject(jsonData, dataType);
            return data;
        }
    }

    public async Task<bool> StreamExists(string stream)
    {
        var result = await tcpConnection.ReadEventAsync(stream, 1, false);
        return result.Status != EventReadStatus.NoStream;
    }
}
```

## Differences in connection management

> Both the TCP and gRPC clients are managing reconnections. That's the reason why it should be registered as a single instance in the application. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both the TCP and gRPC clients manage reconnections. Therefore it should be registered as a single instance in the application. 
```

The TCP client requires calling the `ConnectAsync` method at least once to initiate the connection. That wasn't ideal if you wanted to inject an already set up connection, as you either had to call it asynchronously or risk deadlocks.

```csharp
private async Task<IEventStoreConnection> GetEventStoreConnection(string connectionString)
{
    var tcpConnection = EventStoreConnection.Create(connectionString);
    await tcpConnection.ConnectAsync();
    return tcpConnection;
}
```

> As TCP client connection logic is not thread-safe (`ConnectAsync` method), other operations are thread-safe. Because of that, you have to ensure that you won't have a race condition. You also should consider handling `Closed` events to manage reconnection if it is closed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP client connection logic is not thread-safe (`ConnectAsync` method), however the other operations are thread-safe. Because of that, you have to ensure that you won't have a race condition. You also should consider handling `Closed` events to manage reconnection if it is closed. 
```

> TCP client supports built-in reconnections; however, you need to be careful about setting the connections options properly. Wrongly defined settings can cause a flood of reconnections, increasing the chance for failure. For instance, additional retries may worsen if the reason was a high load on the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP client supports built-in reconnections; however, you need to be careful about setting the connections options properly. Wrongly defined settings can cause a flood of reconnections, increasing the chance for failure. For instance, additional retries may worsen if the reason was a high load on the database.
```

- as stream revision cannot be a negative number, the type was changed from `long` to `ulong`,
- to reduce the chance of accidentally providing the wrong revision value, we created a dedicated type: `StreamState`. It has `Any`, `NoStream`, `StreamsExists` values.

If you had wrapper methods similar to [presented above](#migration-strategies). You'd need to update it to:

```csharp{3-4,12-13,24-25}
    public Task AppendEvents(
        string streamName,
-       long version,
+       ulong version
        params object[] events
    )
    {
        var preparedEvents = events
            .Select(ToEventData)
            .ToArray();

-       return tcpConnection.AppendToStreamAsync(
+       return grpcClient.AppendToStreamAsync(
            streamName,
            version,
            preparedEvents
        );
    }

    public Task AppendEvents(
        string streamName,
        params object[] events
    )
-        => AppendEvents(streamName, ExpectedVersion.Any, events);
+        => AppendEvents(streamName, StreamState.Any, events);
```

### Transactions

> The most significant breaking change in the gRPC client is that it **does not support transactions anymore**. The TCP client may perform multiple appends to EventStoreDB as one transaction. The transaction can only append events to one stream. Transactions across multiple streams are not supported. The gRPC client still supports appending more than one event to the single stream as an atomic operation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most significant breaking change in the gRPC client is that it **does not support transactions anymore**. The TCP client may perform multiple appends to EventStoreDB in one transaction. The transaction can only append events to one stream. Transactions across multiple streams are not supported. The gRPC client still supports appending more than one event to the single stream as an atomic operation. 
```

```csharp
public class EventStoreDBUnitOfWork
{
    private readonly EventStoreClient grpcClient;
    private readonly List<EventData> uncommittedEvents = new();
    private readonly string streamName;
    private readonly StreamRevision expectedStreamRevision;

    private EventStoreDBUnitOfWork(EventStoreClient grpcClient, string streamName,
        StreamRevision expectedStreamRevision)
    {
        this.grpcClient = grpcClient;
        this.streamName = streamName;
        this.expectedStreamRevision = expectedStreamRevision;
    }

    public static EventStoreDBUnitOfWork Begin(EventStoreClient grpcClient, string streamName,
        StreamRevision expectedStreamRevision) =>
        new(grpcClient, streamName, expectedStreamRevision);

    public Task<IWriteResult> Commit(CancellationToken cancellationToken = default)
        => grpcClient.AppendToStreamAsync(
            streamName,
            expectedStreamRevision,
            uncommittedEvents.ToArray(),
            cancellationToken: cancellationToken
        );

    public void Append(params EventData[] eventData) =>
        uncommittedEvents.AddRange(eventData);
}
```

## Reading Events

### Read direction

> The TCP Client have dedicated methods for reading events in the specific direction: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP Client has dedicated methods for reading events in the specific direction: 
```

- `ReadStreamEventsForwardAsync`,
- `ReadStreamEventsBackwardAsync`,
- `ReadAllEventsForwardAsync`,
- `ReadStreamEventsBackwardAsync`.

In the gRPC client, we unified those methods into methods with the direction parameter:
- `ReadStreamAsync`,
- `ReadAllAsync`.

To read a stream forwards, use:

```csharp
await using var readResult = grpcClient.ReadStreamAsync(
    Direction.Forwards,
    streamName,
    StreamPosition.Start
);
```

To read a stream backwards, use: 

```csharp
await using var readResult = grpcClient.ReadStreamAsync(
    Direction.Backwards,
    streamName,
    StreamPosition.End
);
```

Accordingly, to read the `$all` stream forwards, use:

```csharp
await using var readResult = grpcClient.ReadAllAsync(
    Direction.Forwards,
    streamName,
    Position.Start
);
```

and to read the `$all` stream backwards:

```csharp
await using var readResult = grpcClient.ReadAllAsync(
    Direction.Backwards,
    streamName,
    Position.End
);
```

### Read positions

> Both TCP and gRPC clients allow reading the stream from a specific position (representing the location of the particular event in the stream). We decided to make positions more explicit accordingly to the stream revision changes in [appending new events](#appending-events). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both TCP and gRPC clients allow reading the stream from a specific position (representing the location of the particular event in the stream). We decided to make positions more explicit according to the stream revision changes in [appending new events](#appending-events). 
```

> We expanded a `StreamPosition` class that centralises stream position handling. It still has a `Start` and an `End` constant representing the logical stream's position. However, they return no longer `long` values but `StreamPosition` class instance. We replaced `long` values with `ulong` as stream position is always positive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We expanded a `StreamPosition` class that centralises stream position handling. It still has a `Start` and an `End` constant representing the logical stream's position. However, they no longer return `long` values but a `StreamPosition` class instance. We replaced `long` values with `ulong` as stream position is always positive.
```

`StreamPosition` class has an overloaded operator for `ulong` value assignment. 

```csharp
StreamPosition streamPosition = 100L;
```

You can also convert it from the `StreamRevision`:

```csharp
var streamPosition = StreamPosition.FromStreamRevision(streamRevision);
```

For reading from `$all`, the TCP Client has already the `Position` class. gRPC client also has it, but using `ulong` instead of `long` for commit and prepare positions.

### Read result

> TCP Client requires paging through the results. You must provide the maximum number of events you want to read in the single read call. In the gRPC client, this is optional. By default, it will try to read all events. To make it efficient, read methods return [IAsyncEnumerable](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/archive/msdn-magazine/2019/november/csharp-iterating-with-async-enumerables-in-csharp-8). Which means that it won't load the whole stream at once but iterate sequentially, reducing the memory pressure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCP Client requires paging through the results. You must provide the maximum number of events you want to read in the single read call. In the gRPC client, this is optional. By default, it will try to read all events. To make it efficient, read methods return [IAsyncEnumerable](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/archive/msdn-magazine/2019/november/csharp-iterating-with-async-enumerables-in-csharp-8). Which means that it won't load the whole stream at once but iterate sequentially, reducing the memory pressure.
```

{
    const int pageSize = 4096;

    var readFrom  = 0;
    var events = new List<object>();
    StreamEventsSlice page;

    do
    {
        var page = await tcpConnection.ReadStreamEventsForwardAsync(
            stream, readFrom, pageSize, true
        );

        if (page.Status == SliceReadStatus.StreamNotFound)
            throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(
                nameof(stream), $"Stream '{stream}' was not found"
            );

        events.AddRange(
            page.Events.Select(Deserialize)
        );

        readFrom = stream.NextEventNumber;
    } while (!page.IsEndOfStream);

    return events;
}
```

You can simplify that in the gRPC client into:

```csharp
public async Task<IEnumerable<object>> LoadEvents(string stream)
{
    await using var readResult = grpcClient.ReadStreamAsync(
        Direction.Forwards,
        stream,
        StreamPosition.Start
    );

    if (await readResult.ReadState != ReadState.Ok)
        throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException(
            nameof(stream), $"Stream '{stream}' was not found"
        );

    return await readResult
        .Select(Deserialize)
        .ToListAsync();
}
```

### Serialisation

> The gRPC client uses `ReadOnlyMemory<byte>` instead of byte array to make event processing more efficient. To support that, you will need to modify your deserialisation logic slightly:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The gRPC client uses `ReadOnlyMemory<byte>` instead of a byte array to make event processing more efficient. To support that, you will need to modify your deserialisation logic slightly:
```
